HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
New revelations detail what
the Obama administration knew
of Russian meddling in
the presidential election
and the internal debate
about how to punish
President Putin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm
Judy Woodruff reporting
from Colorado at the Aspen
Institute's Spotlight
Health Conference.
As Congress fights over
replacing Obamacare, we
tackle the controversy
over drug pricing
with Stephen Ubl, head of PhRMA.
It's the nation's
largest pharmaceutical
trade association.
STEPHEN UBL, President
and CEO, PhRMA: We
think, as an industry,
the pricing model needs
to evolve.
We need to move away from
paying for volume to paying
for the value of care.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And uniting
a community through health
-- how one Muslim-based group
is bringing a Chicago
neighborhood together
by focusing on its
most basic needs.
SHAMAR HEMPHILLM, Inner-City
Muslim Action Network: How
you going to change anything
in your neighborhood if
you really can't start
with the place that really
sustains the neighborhood?
And that's the food.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David
Brooks are here to
analyze the week's news.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Senate Republican health
care bill has suffered
another critical defection,
the fifth so far.
Nevada Republican Dean Heller
announced in Las Vegas today
that he can't support the
bill in its current form.
SEN.
DEAN HELLER (R), Nevada:
Well, it's going to be very
difficult to get me to a yes.
They have a lot of work to do.
But you have to protect
Medicaid expansion states.
That's what I want.
Make sure that we're taken care
of here in the state of Nevada.
That's going to be a very
difficult lift, because I can
see the other side is going
to have problems with that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Four other
Senate Republicans oppose the
measure over its subsidies.
But with Democrats united in
opposition, GOP leaders can't
afford to lose more than two
of their own and
still pass the bill.
President Trump says he wanted
to force former FBI Director
James Comey to be honest about
their conversations when he
suggested there might be tapes.
He spoke to FOX News after
announcing yesterday that
he didn't make recordings.
As for firing special counsel
Robert Mueller, he said --
quote -- "We're going to have to
see."
Later, the White House
said Mr. Trump has no
intention of doing that.
In Cincinnati, the murder
trial of a former university
police officer ended today in a
hung jury for a second time.
Ray Tensing killed an
unarmed black man during a
traffic stop in July 2015.
He testified that he feared
Sam Dubose was trying to
drag him or run him over.
After a judge declared a
mistrial today, Dubose's family
called it an unjust result.
City officials urged calm.
JOHN CRANLEY (D), Cincinnati,
Ohio, Mayor: As a city, we
will make sure that people who
are feeling a variety of
emotions, and, in my opinion,
justifiably so, have a right to
express themselves peacefully.
And we have every expectation
that that will be the case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The University
of Cincinnati fired Tensing
last year after his indictment.
North Korea is denying
responsibility for the
death of Otto Warmbier,
the American student
it held for more than a year.
He passed away this
week days after being
returned home in a coma.
In a statement, the North Korean
Foreign Ministry said -- quote
-- "The fact that Warmbier died
suddenly is a mystery
to us as well."
Saudi Arabia and three
other Gulf Arab nations have
issued 13 demands to Qatar.
They have already imposed
an economic blockade,
accusing the Persian Gulf
kingdom of supporting
terror groups.
Today, they said Qatar must shut
down the broadcaster Al-Jazeera
and downgrade diplomatic
relations with Iran,
among other steps.
Qatar said it's
reviewing the demands.
Officials in London
began evacuating five
apartment buildings late
today over fire concerns.
Hundreds of people are
affected, and repairs
could take several weeks.
The buildings have siding
similar to a high-rise
that erupted in flames
last week, killing
79 people.
Investigators confirmed today
that the siding on that building
likely contributed to the
flames' rapid spread.
FIONA MCCORMACK, Detective
Superintendent: Preliminary
tests on the insulation samples
collected from Grenfell Tower
show that they combusted
soon after the test started.
The initial tests on
the cladding tiles also
failed the safety tests.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
investigators say the fire
started in a refrigerator.
They're considering manslaughter
and other criminal charges
against companies that built
and maintained the
apartment tower.
Negotiations are officially
under way to sort out Britain's
exit from the European Union.
Today at an E.U. summit,
British Prime Minister
Theresa May promised no
E.U. nationals living
in the United Kingdom
would have to leave.
May called it a good,
constructive start, but E.U.
leaders were less enthused.
Russia's National Election
Commission has barred opposition
leader Alexei Navalny from
running for president.
The commission says a criminal
conviction for embezzlement
makes him ineligible.
The anti-corruption activist
maintains the case was
politically motivated.
Back in this country, U.S.
military leaders will seek a
six-month delay before allowing
transgender people to enlist.
The Associated Press reports
service chiefs are sending
that recommendation to Defense
Secretary James Mattis.
He will make the final decision.
A ban on transgender troops
serving openly ended last year.
The service chiefs want
more time to develop
policies on the change.
President Trump has signed
a bill aimed at making the
government more accountable to
military veterans.
Vets and their families looked
on during today's ceremony.
The bill gives the Department
of Veterans Affairs more power
to fire employees and protect
whistle-blowers.
And on Wall Street, stocks
struggled to make any headway.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost two points
to close at 21394.
The Nasdaq rose 28 points,
and the S&P 500 added three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
new revelations on the Obama
administration's response to
Russia; the head of the nation's
largest pharmaceutical group on
the battle over health care; how
a Muslim group is
rebuilding a Chicago
community; and much more.
There are new revelations
today about how President Obama
learned of Russia's efforts
to tip the 2016 election in
Donald Trump's favor, and how
his administration responded.
I spoke a short time ago to
Greg Miller, national security
correspondent for The Washington
Post, who co-authored a lengthy
investigation that the paper
published today on this topic.
And I began by asking about
the role Putin played.
GREG MILLER, National Security
Correspondent, The Washington
Post: In early August, the
CIA comes to the White House
with a really remarkable
piece of intelligence.
It's drawn on sourcing deep
inside the Russian government.
It establishes that Putin
himself is directing
this operation, this
election interference
that is just unfolding
in the United States.
But it goes one step
farther than that.
And that's what's
most interesting and
extraordinary to me.
It also captures
Putin's instructions
on what the objectives
of this operation are.
He identifies those objectives
as denigrating, damaging Hillary
Clinton, trying to help defeat
her, and trying to help
elect Donald Trump.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You also
point out the levels of
secrecy and precaution
taken by the administration
and the intelligence agencies
in how this information gets
to the president and even
how people need to talk about
it and share information.
GREG MILLER: Yes, it's really
remarkable, the precautions
that the administration was
taking with this information.
This intel, when it's delivered
to the White House, is brought
by courier in an envelope
with restricted markings on it.
It's eyes only, which means
it can only be shared with
the four people who are named
on the envelope, President Obama
and three of his senior aides.
They then they have,
when they're done reading
this thing, put it back
in the envelope, send
it straight back to the CIA.
It sets in motion a series of
meetings, high-level meetings at
the White House in the Situation
Room.
Only four senior officials
are initially allowed
to participate, although
that circle begins
to widen in the ensuing weeks.
And even there, there are things
that I didn't know about how
the White House works that,
apparently, in the Situation
Room, there are video cameras
that send feeds to other offices
in the White House, so that
others sitting at their desks
can monitor what's happening
in that room.
All those feeds were shut off
for all of these discussions.
The only time that had
ever happened before
was in the run-up to
the bin Laden operation
in 2011.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk
a little bit about what the
Obama administration tried
to do about it.
They debated a menu of
options, so to speak,
for quite some time.
GREG MILLER: Right.
So, they debated and
debated and debated.
That went on for months after
this bombshell intelligence
report from the CIA.
They got off to a fast.
There are groups, NSC,
interagency groups that are
convening at the White House and
kicking around ideas that are
really aggressive, sector-wide
economic sanctions that could
put a dent in Russia's economy,
cyber-retaliation that could
take portions of Russia's power
grid or other targets
offline for short
periods, even releasing
embarrassing information on
Putin, the way he was sort
of accused of orchestrating
embarrassing leaks
about Hillary Clinton.
None of those end up surviving
this debate process that goes
well past the election deep
into November and December.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You
also highlight kind of
bureaucratic hurdles.
The Department of Homeland
Security goes out to
states that could be
affected by this hacking
and says, we would like to help,
but the voting infrastructure in
America is not deemed critical
enough?
GREG MILLER: Yes, and this
is one of those cases where
the hyper-partisanship of our
country now really works
against our security
interests in many ways.
So this is a case where
the Obama administration
is just trying to reach
out to state officials,
saying Russia's attacking
us, we are worried about what
might happen on Election Day.
We want to try to help
make sure that all of our
voting systems are secure.
We can run scans.
We can try to be
of assistance here.
And Republicans in particular,
state officials, resist this and
see it as sort of an overreach,
an attempted federal takeover
of state authorities,
and argue against it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know,
you point out that this is
in the backdrop of a climate
where there is an underlying
assumption that Hillary Clinton
is going to win, where Donald
Trump has gone out and
said the election is
going to be rigged anyway.
And really not until after
the election does the Obama
administration start to put all
these pieces together.
GREG MILLER: Yes, I don't
think you can overestimate
the importance of that,
because the assumption
in the White House and
as well as across media
organizations like ours
and across the country,
frankly, there was just an
assumption that we were looking
at a Clinton -- a coming Clinton
administration.
So, inside the White
House, their deliberations
are, well, this is all
important, but we have
got to -- we're going to
have time to deal with
this after the election.
In fact, if we don't finish
dealing with it, well, the
Clinton administration certainly
can.
And, also, they don't
want to take any action
leading up to the election
that would be perceived
as interfering politically
to help Hillary Clinton.
They're worried that
that would contaminate
her expected triumph.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Greg Miller,
the reporting is fantastic,
you and your colleagues, Adam
Entous and Ellen Nakashima.
Thanks so much for joining us.
GREG MILLER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As the battle
over health care rages in
Congress, one constant complaint
from consumers is
over drug prices.
Judy Woodruff is in
Colorado with our look
at that issue -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks, Hari.
The Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers Association, or
PhRMA, is the nation's largest
group representing
drug companies.
Stephen Ubl is its
president and CEO.
I sat down with him here
at the Aspen Spotlight
Health Conference today,
and began by asking
about the latest Republican
plan to overhaul Obamacare.
STEPHEN UBL, President and CEO,
PhRMA: Well, it's still a very
fluid dynamic, as you know.
We haven't taken a formal
position on the bill.
I think it's clear there
is a direction towards
more autonomy for states
to shape their insurance
markets, as well as shaping
their own insurance designs.
So, we will be very engaged in
this discussion, and the prism
with which we will look at it
is making sure that patients
have access to the breakthrough
treatments and cures our
industry is developing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other major
health care associations,
hospitals, doctors and others
have been pretty critical.
Is the pharmaceutical industry
alone in a way or almost
alone in not being as worried,
as critical of what the
Republicans are doing?
STEPHEN UBL: Well, I think
it's fair to say that those
stakeholders are focused on the
same issues that we are, but,
again, I think the bill is
still making its way through the
process, and we will be very
engaged as the possess unfolds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We heard
President Trump during
the campaign speak
about the high cost of
prescription drugs.
I guess it wasn't long after
the election he talked about
the drug companies getting
away with murder.
We're now hearing, though,
that the administration
may not be coming down as
hard on the pharmaceutical
industry as some thought
moving to a different system.
Is that your sense of what's
happening, that you're going
to get maybe a better treatment
from this administration
than some had expected?
STEPHEN UBL: I don't think I
want to speculate on what the
administration will do in this
area.
I will say that we had a
very productive discussion
with the president with
some of our leadership
earlier in the year, and
I think the president's
focused on two things.
One is ensuring that we
continue to lead the world in
developing better treatments and
cures and, two, on
jobs, ensuring that
we have more domestic
investment in the United
States.
And I think our industry
is really poised to deliver
on both those fronts.
Our industry spends $70
billion a year in research and
development, which is more than
any other industry.
So, in general, we're encouraged
by the direction we're heading.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think everybody
agrees drug prices are out
of control in this country.
Pfizer announced it's
raising the prices of
100 drugs by 20 percent,
including some well-known
drugs like I guess
Viagra and Lyrica.
Drug companies have been sued,
I know, by some state attorneys
general, alleged collusion
and rising prices.
What is going on?
What do you see is
the problem here?
STEPHEN UBL: Well, I
should start by trying
to make sure that we're
on the same fact basis.
So, if you look at Express
Scripts, which is a leading
PBM in the industry, pharmacy
benefit manager, looking
at spending in 2016, drug
spending went up 3.5 percent.
And net prices are
up 2.8 percent.
So, if you went two or
three years, prescription
drug spending was actually
the lowest growing
or slowest growing
category in health care.
We did go through a spike in
2014 and 2015, I would argue,
due to some anomalous factors.
FDA approved a
number of new drugs.
Medicaid was expanded.
And a new cure for
hepatitis C was introduced,
which revolutionized
the treatment of that
disease and will obviate the
need for liver transplant, as
well as reduce the incidence
of liver cancer.
We're now on the back-half
of that spike, if you will.
The python has sort of
digested the tennis ball.
And even CMS' own actuaries
estimate that drug spending
will be between 4 and 6 percent
for the next 10 years, which
is roughly in line with
overall health care spending.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same
time, a lot of finger-pointing
going on in the health care
industry between the drug
companies, the pharmacy benefit
managers, hospitals, insurers.
A lot of those fingers
are being pointed, though,
still at your industry.
STEPHEN UBL: We think
there are -- we take these
issues very seriously.
And we think there are
pragmatic, consumer-oriented
solutions to address
some of the issues that
have been raised.
So, for example, a lot of the
media attention in the last year
is focused on companies that
are really nothing like
our member companies.
They are companies that are
taking old drugs without market
competition and raising the
price dramatically.
And we think there are
policy solutions, primarily
at the FDA, that would
address those situations.
Similarly, we think, as
an industry, the pricing
model needs to evolve.
We need to move away from
paying for volume to paying
for the value of care.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I was reading
that's what the administration
is -- among the things
the administration
is looking at.
I have also read, though,
that the critics look at that
and say that, in the end, it
may work for some people, but
it's not going to work for
everybody who needs prescription
drugs.
STEPHEN UBL: Well,
again, our sector may
be a little bit lagging
other health care sectors
in this movement towards paying
based on value, as opposed to
the volume of care, but it's
one of the rare areas
in health care policy
where everyone agrees.
Payers want to move
in this direction, our
members want to move in
this direction, providers
want to move in this direction.
Again, take cancer therapy.
We want to be able to
offer novel discounts.
But there's a number of
public policy barriers
that stand in the way of
moving in that direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of
the fundamental questions
I have heard out there
is, why can't, for
example, Veterans Administration
folks get drug prices much
lower than what ordinary
people can get?
Why can't there be -- why
can't there be some sort of
movement in that direction?
Why can't there be
negotiations with Medicare
over the price of drugs?
STEPHEN UBL: I think there's
been a little bit of clinical
trial on this question.
If you look at countries that
have adopted models like the
VA on a broad scale, the U.K.,
for example, what you find
is that patients have less
access to novel therapies.
And we think that would be a
movement in the wrong direction.
So the VA, keep in mind, is a
closed system, a small number,
relatively small number of
hospitals and consumers.
If you take those price
controls and expand them to the
entire market, you're going to
reduce patient access and we
think create distortions that
impact the rest of the market.
So we believe it's much better
to move in the direction of
negotiations in the private
sector between our members and
plans, again, to try to achieve
some specific metrics tied
to patient outcomes and then
be reimbursed on a differential
basis based on whether the
patient actually
achieves those outcomes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, opioids.
As you know very well, I think
something like 33,000 people
died from opioid abuse in 2015.
They expect the number to go up
last year, this year, and so on.
We know towns are overwhelmed.
Critics are saying so much of
this lies at the feet of drug
companies that are promoting
drugs that people get hooked on,
and then those same companies
minimizing or even trivializing
the impact.
How do you, as someone who
sits in such a responsible
position, look at this?
STEPHEN UBL: I can assure you
that -- speaking personally on
behalf of the industry, that
no one trivializes the crisis
that we're facing in this
country around opioids.
But it is a
multifactorial crisis.
There's a lot of stakeholders
that need to come
together on a solution,
prescribing physicians,
manufacturers, treatment
facilities, state and
local governments.
And, for our part, we're
committed to engaging with
all those stakeholders
to find solutions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is
there going to be a
change, do you think?
STEPHEN UBL: Well, just to give
you an example, the industry is
in favor of mandatory training
for health care professionals
to learn more about pain
management, to learn more about
appropriate prescribing.
So we want to be part of the
solution to this problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stephen Ubl,
pharmaceutical manufacturers
association, thank you very
much.
STEPHEN UBL: Thank you.
It's great to be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some of the
most influential figures in
health care are here in Aspen,
and we will air some of my
interviews with them from
Spotlight Health next week.
Plus, at the end of the
broadcast, we will meet
a choreographer who
explains why we always
feel better after
dancing -- Hari?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields and David Brooks
take on the week's news;
one reverend's mission to
bridge racial and class divides
through what he calls moral
revival.
But first: The South Side of
Chicago has long been plagued
with some of the highest crime
rates in the nation, but one
man is trying to transform
this area by focusing on the
everyday needs and the health
of those who live there.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Along this
stretch on Chicago's South Side,
Rami Nashashibi is a familiar
face.
He's the founder of the
nonprofit IMAN, the Inner-City
Muslim Action Network.
And for more than 20 years, he's
focused on the root problems
these neighborhoods face.
RAMI NASHASHIBI, Founder,
Inner-City Muslim
Action Network: So,
violence, poverty, lack
of real meaningful job
opportunities, lots of
young people with very few
meaningful trajectories.
This set of blocks was ravaged
by the foreclosure crisis.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nashashibi
grew up the son of a
Jordanian diplomat.
He first came to the U.S. for
college, and later got a Ph.D.
in sociology from the University
of Chicago.
He started IMAN in 1997 to
help bridge divides he saw here
between Muslim immigrants and
African-Americans.
The organization has grown ever
since, and now has an annual
budget of nearly $4 million,
with funding from a mix of
grants and private donations.
This is social activism,
he says, grounded in faith.
RAMI NASHASHIBI: We have been
unapologetically rooted in the
values and spiritual tradition
that comes from the Muslim
community, while, at the same
time, acknowledging that so much
of that is also very universal.
JEFFREY BROWN: One major
focus of the organization
now, neighborhood
corner stores, the small
shops that many here rely on,
in the absence of supermarkets
in these neighborhoods, but
also places that have
historically generated
tensions between the
Arab immigrants who own
them, and their
African-Americans customers.
IMAN is trying to change that.
RAMI NASHASHIBI: That corner
store doesn't have to be what
many corner stores in Chicago
are, often a place of death,
not a spot that you really
want to go into, that we could
radically re-imagine it.
JEFFREY BROWN: At the
Morgan Mini Mart in
Englewood, store owner Sami
Deffala, who immigrated
from Palestine, is one of 60
store owners in the area who
have signed onto IMAN's corner
store campaign.
SAMI DEFFALA, Business
Owner: We have been in the
neighborhood for 27 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: The idea is to
bring everyone together around
a common need: fresh and more
healthy food.
SAMI DEFFALA: We
have stepped it up.
With their help, we have been
able to acquire fruits and
vegetables that are subsidized,
a lot lower price, and,
in turn, we sell them
at a lot lower price.
So, that way, it's
a win-win, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: And
it's much needed, says
IMAN's Shamar Hemphill.
SHAMAR HEMPHILL, Inner-City
Muslim Action Network: You
know, it's a war on nutrition
that's constantly killing
a lot of communities.
Black men die at higher
rates, contributed
to their diet, right?
How you going to change
anything in your neighborhood
if you really can't
start with the place that
really sustains
the neighborhood?
And that's the food.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sami Deffala
says, in the process,
a new trust has emerged
between him and his
customers.
SAMI DEFFALA: People talk.
People in the community talk.
Hey, listen, that guy is a
good guy there, you know?
You don't want to go
in there and do him
any harm or any wrong.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just a few
blocks away, IMAN also
operates a free health clinic.
Here, physician's assistant Muna
Odeh, whose family immigrated
from Palestine, treats many
like 58-year-old Jerome
Reynolds, a diabetic
without insurance.
MUNA ODEH, Physician's
Assistant: People who are
underserved and often forgotten.
And a lot of times, they feel
that they are not in control
of their situation, and not
in control of their health,
because of their limited access
to funds and insurance and
things like that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Here, too,
there's an emphasis on
making better food choices.
And there's another benefit
to this interaction, Muna Odeh
says, a better understanding of
Muslim Americans.
MUNA ODEH: All they know
is what they see on TV.
And, obviously, that's not
ever painted in the best light.
That's especially important
for me, being a Muslim female
who's covered, who wears a
hijab.
It shows them that we
are the same, that our
struggles are all the same.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dr. Angela
Odoms-Young, a professor of
nutrition at the University
of Illinois-Chicago,
is studying IMAN's work.
She sees positive results.
DR.
ANGELA ODOMS-YOUNG, University
of Illinois-Chicago:
Traditionally, we used
to focus on individuals.
Can you make a good decision
when it comes to healthy eating?
We now know, from a
research perspective,
that community matters.
It's really important that
you have access to fruits and
vegetables, not just what you
can do as an individual.
JEFFREY BROWN: Odoms-Young
says that IMAN is helping to
break a long-held myth that
residents of low-income
communities simply don't
want healthier food.
DR.
ANGELA ODOMS-YOUNG: There's
many people in low-income
communities and communities of
color that they are very
interested in having access
to healthy food options.
But one of the big problems
is the structural barriers.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
structural barrier being
tackled here, finding
jobs for men like
Khalid Partee, a former
gang member and drug dealer.
KHALID PARTEE, Chicago: I did
14 years in federal prison.
JEFFREY BROWN: After his
release, Partee earned a
technical degree in heating
and air conditioning
ventilation.
KHALID PARTEE: I graduated
in a year-and-a-half
at the top of my class.
JEFFREY BROWN: He credits
Nashashibi with helping to turn
around his life and now teaches
construction skills to men
recently released from prison.
It's part of IMAN's reentry
program designed that
was provide both jobs
and to fix up abandoned
homes in the neighborhood.
KHALID PARTEE: When these
guys come out of prison, if
we can try to get them a trade
quickly or get them accustomed
to being in a working condition,
getting up in the morning
and coming to class and getting
up, going to work, you start
making better decisions.
You top taking less chances,
because you have responsibility.
You have got more people
that rely on you now.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Rami
Nashashibi, it's all
part of meeting the
needs of residents in
these often-neglected
neighborhoods.
But even after 20 years,
he admits that far
more work is needed.
RAMI NASHASHIBI: You know, for
every one person you're able
to employ, there's 50 that are
looking for jobs.
For every block that you
stabilize, there's the sense
that there's 25, 35 blocks that
need that exact
same intervention.
JEFFREY BROWN: Undaunted,
IMAN is actually expanding.
It's opened a new center in
Atlanta, and hopes to work to
other cities around the nation.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown in Chicago.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
David, let me start with you.
Let's start talking about
the health care plan that the
Senate rolled out this week.
You surprised at what is
different, what's the same
between the House bill?
DAVID BROOKS: I'm
a little surprised.
First, it's sort
of Obamacare-lite.
It's not going to work.
It's functionally
nonoperational, because
it will encourage, when
they're healthy, to
exit the system and
then go back into the
system when they're sick.
And that's a recipe for a death
spiral in a lot of places.
So I think, functionally,
it's not going to work.
Politically, I have to
say, it's kind of canny.
Mitch McConnell had these
two wings of his party.
And I think he steered as well
as is possible to steer down
the middle to give the right,
the Ted Cruz folks the cuts
in Medicaid and Medicare
and stuff like that.
He gave the center basically
the structure of Obamacare
with some of the rules about
preexisting conditions.
So, I think, politically,
it's an act of skill.
And as I look forward, is this
thing going to pass, I still
think probably not because
I don't think you can get the
whole Republican Party behind
this thing, but I'm reminded
not to underestimate
Mitch McConnell.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Have the
Republicans made the case that
this is something better or
just that this is not Obamacare?
DAVID BROOKS: It's
not Obamacare.
What it does -- you ought
to start with, what kind
of country are we in?
We're in a country where
-- widening inequality.
And so I think it's possible to
be a conservative and to support
market mechanisms basically
to redistribute wealth down
to those who are suffering.
This bill doesn't do that.
It goes the other way.
So, I think, fundamentally, it
doesn't solve the basic problem
our country has, which is
a lot of people are
extremely vulnerable.
And so I do think, as a solution
any the range of health care
problems, I don't think it's
it.
I don't even think
repealing Obamacare.
It's a cheaper
version of Obamacare.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Two things
hit me, first of all.
We know there's been
no debate, no hearings,
so that's been a cry.
But it's interesting, because
there is no public case to
be made for the Republican
plan, none.
I mean, at least with
the Obamacare, Affordable
Care Act, you could
say, no lifetime limit,
a children -- children
could stay on their
parents' plan until the
age of 26, no preexisting
condition will deny you
coverage, no lifetime
illness will knock you off.
There was a case.
You could argue
against the case.
There is no public case
that has been made in either
the House or the Senate.
So, they hold no hearings,
and there is no public debate,
because they don't want to
take the time to make
the case for it because
they don't have a case.
And they don't want to give
the other -- opposition
a case to make -- the
time to make the case
against it.
And what it is, the only thing
that the House and the Senate
are consistently faithful on
is that it's a major tax cut.
It is a redistribution.
Obama, who was, you know, if
anything, overly moderate for
many tastes, did, in fact, lay
it on the most advantaged among
us to pay, to cover people
who couldn't afford it in
his plan.
And a 3.8 percent tax
on unearned income for
those earning over a
quarter of a million
dollars became the rallying
cry, the organizing
principle for the opposition.
And that's the one constant
that has been through it all.
Warren Buffett, to his
everlasting credit,
pointed out that he
will get a tax cut under
the Republican plan
this year of $630,000.
That's the redistribution.
And, you know, in the
richest nation in the
history of the world, it
is a terrible indictment,
a sad commentary that the
most vulnerable among us, the
least -- the least among us
are really tossed off as
a political statement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, what's
the Democratic counter to this?
I realize that they support
Obamacare at is core, but what
about the things that they
can agree on that
need improvements?
Why not come up with some
sort of a counter and
a fix and propose that?
MARK SHIELDS: Good question.
That's one of the reasons
there has been no debate is
threat at there hasn't been the
opportunity for debate.
They have foreclosed it.
But, no, the Democrats
have chosen to focus all
attention on the other.
I think it's one of the
problems the Democrats have.
I think they learned this week
in the Georgia 6 that there are
limits to being against Donald
Trump, although Donald
Trump expands the limits
on a regular basis.
There are limits to
being against him as a
political strategy and to
have political relevance
to voters.
You have to be for.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What
do you think about the
likelihood of passage?
MARK SHIELDS: You
know, I am not sure.
Mitch McConnell is a
master inside player.
He's a terrible outside player.
He doesn't make a
public case for it.
But, inside, he knows
the Senate well.
And, what, we have had now
five Senate say that they would
have problems with it, which
is sort of the
opening negotiation.
And Dean Heller, who we
saw earlier in Nevada,
is in real trouble.
He's up for reelection in
a tough state, in a state
that has expanded Medicaid.
I mean, Medicaid, Hari,
I think, is health care
for poorer Americans.
And what this plan does is
essentially starve Medicaid.
The Senate does it slower.
The House does it faster.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He brought
up the special elections.
We have had five now.
The Republicans seem to be
holding, if not winning.
Is this trouble
for the Democrats?
DAVID BROOKS: I think so.
I think the Georgia
loss is a big loss.
I don't think it's, oh, this is
always a Republican district,
it's not such a big deal.
If the Democrats are going to
pick up seats, it is going to
be in upscale, highly educated
suburban seats.
And this was tailor-made
for that, a seat that
Trump barely won.
And so if after all that's
happened in the last four or
five months, they can't pick
up the seat, that to
me is an indictment.
It's first a sign that
there are limits to being
anti-Trump, second, that
the Trump phenomenon
was not just a fluke, that it's
based on some deep structural
things in the economy that
are driving people to
support the Republicans,
some deep structural
things in the country,
that people are
extremely distrustful of
government and extremely
distrustful of Washington.
There's also a sign that the
Republicans, despite all that's
happened, are still considered
the party of change.
And if they want change,
they're still likely to
go to the Republicans.
And, finally, it's a
sign the Democratic
Party is too coherent.
They have got a Bernie Sanders,
which is strong and coherent,
but that's not the kind of wing
that's going to work
in this district.
And the Democratic center,
aside from the one candidate
they had down there, is meager.
And without that, there are
going to be just a lot of
districts you're not going to do
so great in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, he
had a four-point answer.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: He did.
But I will cut it down to two.
OK?
No, politics isn't
like the Olympics.
In the Olympics, you
get a silver medal,
you get a bronze medal.
There's only one winner.
And David's right.
Close only counts in
horseshoes and hand
grenades and slow-dancing.
Coming in second, and even
a good second and a close
second, doesn't do it.
Winning is coming in first.
And the Republicans did win.
And, yes, it's a district
that Mitt Romney carried by 24
points and John McCain carried
by 19 points.
But one of the things that
turned out was, when you spend
that much money -- and give
the Republicans credit.
They turned out the
Republican vote.
When you spend that much
money, then the intensity
and the passion of the
opposition, who were
the Democrats in
this case, is kind of
neutralized by the turnout.
There were 260,000 people who
voted Tuesday in a special
election, which is 50,000 more
than voted in the
2014 general election.
So, I mean, it was a
remarkable turnout.
And you can't argue that, gee,
if we just had two more days,
it would have been a -- I
think the Democrats have to
come up with what they are for,
what is it, rather than simply
being against Donald
Trump, which is...
DAVID BROOKS: I do think -- I
would be curious to hear Mark's
view on this -- I do think,
on net, Nancy Pelosi can be
a very masterful leader again
inside, but I do think she's
become a central liability
for people around the country.
Now, the question will be,
OK, if they got rid of Nancy
Pelosi as party leader, would
the next person be
just as unpopular?
And, potentially, but I
think potentially not.
And I do think, if you're a
Democrat, you do have to think
about, who is currently the
face of our party?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pelosi
says she's worth the cost.
MARK SHIELDS: Well,
Nancy Pelosi, I have
said before, was the most
effective House speaker
in my time in Washington.
What she did -- we talk about
the Affordable Care Act.
Barack Obama didn't pass
Nancy Pelosi passed the
Affordable Care Act.
She passed it three
times through the House
of Representatives.
She has raised $141 million
last cycle for Democrats.
Sadly, tragically,
money does matter.
Paul Ryan's political action
committee, with unnamed donors,
spent $7 million in this special
election.
So, I think, you know,
Republicans have been
running since 1984,
when Jeane Kirkpatrick
gave the keynote address
at the convention, against
San Francisco Democrats.
And, you know, maybe Nancy
Pelosi, not a dress designer,
and buy off the rack or whatever
else, but I don't think
it's going to change.
And I don't think she will be
the determining factor on the
ballot in voters' minds in 2018.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, some
of the statements that have been
coming out of the White House,
more specifically from Donald
Trump, yesterday saying he
didn't know that there were any
tapes or any recordings,
that he didn't make any, this
follows a dozen false statements
at the rally that he
had in Iowa this week.
And then you kind of just go
right back to how President
Obama bugged Trump Tower or
the millions of illegal votes
for Hillary or the size of
the crowd at the inauguration.
Any structural consequence
to the office of this?
Because it doesn't seem to
be having an impact on him.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
And I wonder, what's going
to happen to our debate?
After Trump leaves,
whenever that is, do we snap
back to what we consider
the normal standards
of honesty, or is
this the new norm?
And that's why, even though
it doesn't seem like Trump to
point out, as my paper did,
in a long list today, the
definitive guide to the lies
of Donald Trump, I think it's
still worth making that case,
because a lot - - the thing we
have to fear most is essentially
a plague of intellectual
laziness, a plague of
incuriosity, a plague
of apathy about honesty.
And once the whole political
system gets affected by
that, then we're really sunk.
And so I do think keeping his
feet on the fire, no matter
how little he pays a price
for it, is still worth doing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I would say this.
He's paying a price,
in the sense The Wall
Street Journal/NBC
poll asked voters, whom
do you believe, James
Comey or Donald Trump?
And by a 2-1 margin, voters
believe James Comey, who, until
a month ago, was a villain
to so many Democrats because
of the Hillary Clinton race.
Overwhelmingly, Americans
do not believe that he's
honest, or he's trustworthy,
he's knowledgeable,
he's experienced or he
has the right temperament.
By a 48-16 margin, they
believe the opposite.
And that is a real
liability for anybody who
wants to lead a country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But in that
same poll, you see that it's
78 percent of Dems, 26 percent
of Republicans who have
that trust in that case.
So, Mark Shields, David
Brooks, we will leave it there.
Thank you.
We hear a lot about how divided
our country is along many lines:
race, class and especially
now our politics.
But in our next Race Matters
conversation, "NewsHour"
special correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault talks with
the co-authors of "The
Third Reconstruction:
How a Moral Movement
Is Overcoming the Politics
of Division and Fear" about
their success in bridging those
divides.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
In recent weeks, Reverend
William Barber stepped
down from heading the
NAACP in North Carolina to focus
on what he calls a national
moral revival, updating the
Poor People's Campaign started
by the Reverend Martin Luther
King Jr. that linked the civil
rights struggle for
African-Americans to demands for
equality for all poor people.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II, Co-Author,
"The Third Reconstruction:
How a Moral Movement Is
Overcoming the Politics
of Division and Fear": There was
this thing, if you will, called
the white Southern strategy.
And the goal of it was
undermine black and
white fusion coalitions.
What we're going to do is,
we're going to figure out a way
to talk that makes poor whites
think that they're losing
because black people and
brown people are gaining.
And what you do in that is, you
make poor whites, who should
be allies with poor blacks,
think that their problem,
their poverty is being caused
because black and brown people
are acquiring something or
taking something from them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So,
what led you to try and bridge
that gap, and what made you
want to do that?
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: Dr. King
said -- back in the '60s, he
said, the only transformative
force that could really, fully
transform America would be for
poor whites and blacks and brown
people and working
people to come together.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Jonathan
Wilson-Hartgrove conversion
began when he first met Reverend
Barber.
Before that, he had been a young
conservative who had worked
both for the Moral Majority,
a political group associated
with the Christian right and the
Republican Party, and also for
conservative South Carolina
Senator Strom Thurmond.
What was your own attitude
about poor black people and
black people in general?
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE,
Co-Author, "The Third
Reconstruction: How
a Moral Movement
Is Overcoming the Politics of
Division and Fear": So, I was
raised in the Southern Baptist
Church in a sundown town.
Until 1983, there was a sign
at the edge of our town that
told black people they weren't
welcome there after
the sun went down.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: I have
read that you called yourself
a racist in those days.
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE: Sure.
I didn't know I was a racist,
but Reverend Barber helped me
see that I was racist, and,
more importantly, that my
racism was getting in the way
of loving Jesus, which is what
I really wanted to do.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Wilson-Hartgrove first
heard Reverend Barber
some 20 years ago at
a meeting called by the
North Carolina governor.
Reverend Barber delivered
a motivational speech to a
gathering of young people.
Wilson-Hartgrove was moved
by what Barber said and began
to understand how racism had
been used as a tool to divide.
Growing up poor,
Wilson-Hartgrove had
never before realized
what he had in common with
poor black people.
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE: We
were taught to believe that
there were people who were
poor because they
chose to be poor.
And that narrative kept us
from seeing the way that our
religion was being used to pit
us against other people.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Reverend
Barber has even taken his
message into Appalachia, and
up to Mitchell County,
North Carolina.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: Mitchell
County, North Carolina is a
place where, in 1920, all the
black people were run out of
town over the accusation of a
black man raping a white woman.
It's 97 percent white,
77 percent Republican.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Wary,
but undeterred, Reverend Barber
seized on the invitation of
this rural white church.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: I
went in and talked to
them for about an hour.
And I said, listen, this
legislature just cut,
denied Medicaid expansion.
There are 1,000 people in this
county that would get health
care, and they can't be black,
because there are no
black people are up here.
They cut funding for
public education.
You are losing teachers here.
And they have to be white.
Now, you voted for some of the
people because of what they
told you they stood on prayer
in school and abortion and
homosexuality, but let's look
at what they are doing, and
how it is hurting you.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So,
basically, what you did was to
talk to them about the things
that they had in common.
And it registered.
It permeated their
consciousness.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: You talk to
people honestly, you talk to
them about what it means to be
a human being, and you
show them the hypocrisy.
You know, you show them how
they're being fooled, if you
will, that people are saying,
I care about your best
interests, but those
people are actually
putting in place policies
that are hurting everybody.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What
strategy did you use to reach
people who had been brought
up like Jonathan?
What did you do to convince
them that this wasn't right?
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: I know
that many of my white
evangelical friends or
many African-Americans
who were bought into
this kind of a public
engagement-type faith
really have been introduced
to -- and I say this sorrowfully
-- a form of heresy and a form
of theological malpractice.
To try to suggest that Jesus
was just about a little prayer,
a little preaching and a
little worship and a little
charity -- the very Jesus that
white evangelicals claim to
lift up was a brown-skinned
Palestinian Jew whose
first sermon was
challenging the economic
exploitation of the empire.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Reverend
Barber and Wilson-Hartgrove
have been working together
in a multiracial movement known
as Moral Monday, weekly protests
held on the grounds of the
North Carolina state capitol
in Raleigh aimed at helping
citizens understand their common
interest around such issues
as health care, voting rights
and immigration, also how they
are affected by these and
other governmental policies,
regardless of race or class.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: When we went
into the first Moral Monday
in a diverse role as clergy,
investment, first,
some people laughed.
They said we were a nuisance.
But then they started
seeing more people come,
and they looked diverse.
They said, that's my
teacher getting arrested,
that's my doctor, that's
a black man and white
man walking together.
That's a Jew and a
rabbi and a Christian.
What's going on?
So, people began to think --
even though they didn't get
arrested, they would come.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
The Moral Monday movement
is the foundation for
Reverend Barber's latest
project that he intends
to take to some 25 states.
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE:
What can be learned
from our experience is
that white people need
to talk about race honestly.
We need to say, of
course we're racist.
This is a country that's
built on white supremacy.
You know, it's not like
it's a personal failing.
I inherited this.
Racism is about structures
that pass on what
we inherited, right?
Inequalities that we
inherited are written
into these structures.
And when we help white people
think about that, I think
we're making it possible to
form alliances that we
haven't been able to form.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: And black
people can't be afraid of that.
We have to look back in history.
When black and white people
came together right after the
Civil War, we fundamentally
changed this country.
When black and white and brown
people and Jews and Christians
came together in the civil
rights movement, it
was transformative.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Are you
at all optimistic that the kinds
of things that you're doing
are going to make a
difference in ending racism?
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE: I
think racism is the fundamental
challenge to the American
project.
This is a country that was
built on the original sin of
race-based chattel slavery.
It is how the, you know,
concentrated capital
in this country from
the very beginning has
maintained power.
But I don't think that the
future of America is possible
without dealing with it.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: I'm hopeful.
Optimism is a different thing.
I believe we have to be the
kind of what I call moral
dissenters, moral defibrillators
who shock the nation.
But we also are seeing
something in the wind.
You have white people marching
with Black Lives Matter.
I had a friend of mine who's a
Sikh, and she put it like this.
Quickly, she said, a tomb
is dark and a womb is dark,
but there's a difference.
A tomb is death, a
womb is possibility.
It's dark now.
But if we push and push together
and come together, I think
this is a birthing moment.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Charlayne Hunter-Gaul.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We go back
to Judy now in Aspen -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks, Hari.
We want to introduce
you to Alonzo King, a
noted choreographer who
believes dance improves
our spirits, and that
in turn has a direct
effect on our health.
Take a look.
ALONZO KING, Choreographer:
My name is Alonzo King.
I'm the artistic director
of Alonzo King LINES Ballet.
It's a San Francisco-based
international touring
ballet company.
We were invited to the Health
Festival here at Aspen, and
I brought four dancers from
the company to do a
demonstration and talk
about how health and
art are intertwined.
My mother took
dancing at university.
And when I was a kid, she would
show me things, and I had a
blast with intimacy with my mom.
Plus, I loved moving,
so I never stopped.
There is a triumvirate of
body/mind/soul that is in
a balancing act for health.
If something is imbalanced, then
it's with - - it's dis-eased.
The performance that we do here
on Friday is largely a lecture
demonstration, displaying
how dance is really ideas,
that it's thought made visible,
in the same way that music is
thought made audible.
Our hope is that the
mind will be stirred and
the heart will be moved.
And may argue with it.
You want them to hear it and
to have some response to it.
When I first began
dancing, I had no idea
that it was a profession.
I just knew that it was
an experience that made
the outer world dim.
And I felt larger and euphoric.
And I realized that, when
you have that experience
inside yourself, you
know that every human
being has that potential
for that experience.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Tune in later tonight.
On "Washington Week,"
Robert Costa's roundtable
of reporters put the GOP
alternative to Obamacare
under the microscope.
Find out how your health
coverage could change,
depending on where you live.
That's later tonight
on "Washington Week."
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: Are privately
run prisons helping
or hurting the system?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And before we
go: On my way to Colorado this
week, I stopped off in Nebraska
for an exclusive interview with
the so-called Oracle of Omaha,
billionaire Warren Buffett.
We had a wide-ranging
conversation, everything
from taxes to health
care, to why there aren't
more women in top
roles in business.
There was another report
that came out recently.
The Fortune 500 boards
of companies, the number
of women directors, board
of directors members,
has gone down.
We don't see that many women
running companies, even as we
used to be, or maybe there are
a few more, but it's
not a dramatic -- what's
going on with women?
WARREN BUFFETT, Chairman &
CEO, Berkshire Hathaway: This
country made such a terrible
mistake.
We said all men are created
equal in 1776, and then we
proceeded to act like women were
entitled to be secretaries
or nurses or maybe teachers.
And we took 50 percent of our
talent and put them on the
sidelines in this country.
And it's really a tribute --
it makes me very optimistic
about America, because at least
we're getting to the point where
we're starting to use close
to all of our talent, compared
to when we initially said
50 percent don't even count.
When I went to Columbia Business
School, there was one woman
in our class, Maggie Shanks.
My sisters, I have got one
on each side three years
about on each side of me.
And they are both
absolutely as smart as me.
We ought to take an
I.Q. test together.
And my older sister
says I came close.
(LAUGHTER)
WARREN BUFFETT: So, they didn't
have remotely the same --
they were told in millions of
ways, not by words, just by
all kinds of signals from both
parents and teachers, that they
were loved as much as I was,
but their job was to marry
early and marry well, and, for
me, the sky was the limit.
And it was a very,
very, very unfair world.
And that is -- we have made
significant progress on that.
There is more progress in
some areas than others, but we
have still got a long way to
go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
there was much more.
Part one of my interview
with Warren Buffett
airs Monday night.
And that's it from
Aspen for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
From all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," have a great weekend.
Thank you, and see you soon.